Lidia, you are the Chief Happiness Officer of Habitísimo, a company with more than 2.5 million employees,
with a considerable size, and what I want you to explain to us is this, because your position is what is sometimes called what?
Director of Human Resources?
Director of Human Resources, exactly.
The idea of the name arises from the idea that we had of renewing the department a little,
so that the Human Resources Department becomes a cost center, a benefit center for the company.
Yes, because indeed, on many occasions it is perceived only as a cost center, as a lesser evil,
or a cost that you have to assume, but in some cases it is not perceived as having enough value, and that should not be the case.
Normally, the directors of Human Resources are the necessary evils in the company.
That, necessary evils, I did not get the term.
Because it is at the end of the day the one who has to manage the contracts, select, carry out the training, if there is any.
And what we have tried in Habitísimo is to take a turn to that paradigm.
We knew and we were sure that the first thing we had to do was change the name,
because if you have it in the name it is part of your responsibility, and the happiness of the employees is mine in this case.
And also because we wanted to turn it around.
As you say, the Human Resources team has always been seen as that necessary evil,
the one who has to fix what is broken, or the one who calls the employee when something does not work.
In our case, what we do is work on potentiality.
We try not to wait for something to go wrong to fix it, but proactively make things go better,
and that the employees have to focus on what they really have to focus on, which is doing the job.
I'm going to be the devil's lawyer in this talk.
It sounds very good, what you have said, we are going to focus on potentiality,
but I would like you to help us visualize it with specific examples.
To work in the happiness, which is what we call it in Habitísimo,
I usually touch on four key points.
First, it is the leadership style.
And that goes through working, how the boss or leader communicates with their employees,
and also managing their ego.
And that is perhaps the most delicate or hardest part.
Because when you are a boss, you have to drive a team,
and also feel that their decisions are good,
and you have to be able to listen to what is not doing well in order to improve it.
So you work with the different bosses of the internal departments.
How do you work with them?
We have a leadership program, to work in what is called charismatic leadership,
or being someone influential in your team,
and that generates that movement and makes them better.
And that goes through doing technical training,
like the Power MBA that some of us are doing,
as well as training in terms of...
I didn't know you were a Power MBA student.
Three of the directors are, and we are expanding.
We have technical training, both in our own position,
such as human resources, finance, marketing, etc.
We have training in company management.
For example, the director of Brand can also do training in finance,
training in people management, to complete or improve our capabilities.
And then we have training that has more to do with our leadership style,
work on our profile, and know the profile of the people you have in your team,
to improve communication.
That is one of the phases that we have and that is important.
It's the first one, right?
It's the first one.
Which is working on the leadership style, you said.
The leadership style and communication.
How do we work on communication?
Precisely, which is the second leg...
Sorry to interrupt you, let's do one thing.
You told me there are four, what we are going to do is...
I'm going to ask you to tell me how you are changing the culture of your organization.
I'm going to ask you to tell us what is the benefit of each one of them,
that is, what benefit are you perceiving,
what impact on the organization, on the results, I don't know,
of each of the initiatives that you have launched.
The first one is the leadership one.
I start the leadership part again?
Yes.
You have already told us how, but what I want you to tell me is what benefits,
what have you perceived that has changed thanks to that.
Working on leadership, what we improve, first is the agility of the team.
It is a team that communicates better, that communicates more agilely,
that the workers report more immediately all the problems that may be,
and that are also more prone to give ideas.
I like this a lot because we have seen in many organizations that communication does not flow
and in the end, and it happens a lot, in the people who are, what we call in the last mile,
which is the one who is in contact with the client, people who are in a concentration center, etc.,
who receive very valuable information, not only complaints, suggestions, etc.,
they have millions of ideas, but they never arrive,
they never arrive because then the organizations are long, I don't know if you use that term,
but there is the head of the department, then there is the CEO, etc.,
and in the end what happens is that you are destroying the most important flow of information
that for me is from the client to the CEO, to the one who makes the decision.
To solve that part, what we have are many feedback channels.
We have an intranet, we have anonymous buttons, we have Open Mic sessions
where Jordi and the CEO meet with all the employees they want and for an hour
they ask all the questions or give the feedback they want,
we have ideas sections, we have an application where you vote how happy you have been in the day
and you can leave an anonymous comment.
So there are specific tools to solve this.
Yes, and you also have to facilitate as many channels and tools as possible,
better, anonymous, personal, online, so that everyone has the option to choose which one they like the most.
And the second very important part to give feedback and that people continue to give it to you
is to give immediate answers to the employees, always, in any case,
and work, as I said before, on the part of the ego of the leaders.
Ok, so we have touched on the first part of the four that you have told me,
which is to change the style of leadership, which we do through a very diverse training,
that you work a lot with the bosses of each team and then this issue has arisen,
which is to improve the flow of communication from top to bottom, from bottom to top, etc., with specific tools.
Ok, the second of the four is to work on corporate culture.
You have a series of labor rules, which are the status of the workers,
the agreement that governs you or the written rules that you have as a company and that your labor contract marks you,
but in addition to those you have to have some behavior rules and they must be closely linked to the values
and corporate culture that you want to be reflected in your company.
So, to work on that part, first you have to know what the values are,
you have to have them identified with behaviors,
and all the actions that are carried out from the company must meet those values.
Ok, what are the values?
You have told me that there are a series of values that you have to ensure are present in all the actions, which are?
Working as a team, openness to change, knowing and being aware that your actions have an impact,
talking about things and on that part the feedback is also linked.
We are very clear that feedback is part of one of the values and that is why corporate culture is present.
Knowing that on the Internet things change constantly and that you have to be open to that change,
receiving those changes with a positive attitude, taking into account that it is a team.
When two people started, when there were eight, when there were thirty, that was when I arrived,
and we are still 250 now, and that is a fundamental part for the information to flow.
I have doubts, we have said, the second of the initiatives is to ensure a certain culture that is based on a series of values.
I have doubts about practice, that is, how to get it really, because the subject of corporate culture seems exciting to me,
but sometimes it is difficult to take it to a method, how to achieve it.
It has to be present in all actions, so when you do a selection process,
which would be the first part in which you have contact with a person,
you have to do that selection process based on values, and in addition to selecting by competencies,
do it according to values, and if that person does not meet them, he cannot be part of the company.
That seems to me, indeed, it is very easy to understand, it is common sense, but it works.
That is, if you want, and it is perceived especially in smaller companies,
but it is also true that we can identify certain cultural values in larger companies,
and I am referring to the fact that the profile of people has certain homogeneities,
and it is because the people who have selected them have sought that.
Yes, that is why I was saying that it is important to have values associated with behavior.
We work in a team, for example, and all the offices are open space,
because constant interaction is important.
So a person whose biggest dream is to work in a single office,
the organization no longer has to exist, and this may be a bit extreme,
but in an interview you can see if a person is collaborative,
if he has had problems or not in different teams,
if he is a person who faces changes in his life in a positive and energetic way.
These things can be detected, and that is a first step.
Obviously, in a selection process, there are things that can happen to you,
and that is why, when they are already inside the company,
in the evaluation and feedback processes that we do to measure the individual performance of each of us,
a part of the evaluation of the values is also included.
In addition to all this, we try to recognize the people who show the company's values in an extraordinary way,
and we have them constantly present in all the activities we do.
How do you do that?
Every year we do a survey of values and culture,
and we decide to work during that year on one of the values, the one we want to improve.
A review is made, we see if it makes sense to keep them all the same,
if we have to make some changes, but the whole company participates in that.
It is a job that has to be daily, it is not worth having a picture with the written values,
that is very nice, and we also have it, but there has to be a daily job,
and a person who is responsible for that.
You are.
Exactly, that's where the name goes.
We have said leadership, we have said culture, and there are two more.
Support networks, which is to work, that the colleagues are that, colleagues.
You have to make spaces easier for them to be together.
You have to facilitate activities in which they can interact.
And people have to understand that when they come to work at Habitísimo,
they are not only going to work at Habitísimo in the department of, for example, Comercial España,
but they are going to work in a community in which we all have to be supporting.
That is why we have, as I told you, the Open Space,
we have many monthly trainings that are done interdisciplinarily,
no training is done for an exclusive team, we always try to mix people.
We have play activities, which are the parties, which are very necessary,
although many people think they don't help.
We have all the common spaces, the rest and leisure rooms are located
in a strategic place in the office so that everyone has to go there and meet.
We spend a lot of time taking care of those spaces to make people feel comfortable.
When we incorporate people, we do it in groups and also in groups of different teams
so that they also have that relationship.
We prepare dynamics so that they get to know the people who are already there.
We introduce them, we have quarterly meetings where we introduce the new ones,
we put their photos, etc.
The goal of this entire block, what would it be?
To have a company where the horizontal and vertical communication is better
because everyone feels part of the same team?
Everyone feels part of the same team and everyone is open to help the person next to them
because they know them.
Regardless of whether they are dedicated to something totally different.
Because that in large organizations, it seems that it is like they become true silos,
it is like, well, I'm going to pass this on to the legal ones,
and the legal ones perceive it as a few shots that are going to pull you back.
Or there are those in finance who tell me, no, the one in shopping, right?
And you want to avoid that.
Of course, in fact, for example, for the technology team, it is super beneficial
to go and sit down every so often with the commercial team,
because while they are making calls, they can see how they interact with, for example,
our CRM that they have developed, and it helps them to make improvements for the commercial team.
Or I am very interested in knowing what the communication dynamics are like
between the commercial team and the customer attention team
to see if the position they have or the physical distribution of the office is optimal
so that they are in constant interaction, for example.
You know what happens many times when organizations grow and become too departed?
The worst of all is not that they lose communication between them,
but that a huge distance is usually generated with the customer, which is the most important thing.
So in the end, the technical team measures its productivity based on technical advances,
but it does not measure it based on the value that the customer has generated.
And in the end, everyone forgets about the customer,
and that has enormous repercussions in the value generation.
Many times we try to break our heads
by looking at the flow of perfect information from the customer to the commercial team,
which will then pass to the customer attention, which will then pass to management,
which will then pass to marketing, which will then pass to technology.
And it is much easier if you make it depend on people.
If you get the commercial team that is calling Brazil to be a friend,
to have a good relationship with the developer who carries that part of the page,
the information will be much more fluid.
Notice how interesting, that sometimes it has more impact not in the development of formal processes,
but the one that is informal, but thanks to the fact that people are close.
What happens is that when you acquire a certain dimension, that is impossible.
You have to accompany someone.
You have 250 employees, but if you had 10,000,
there are formal processes in which that information is shared, or it is impossible.
Yes, obviously, formal processes are super necessary,
and as you grow, they help you to give order,
streamline and ensure that it reaches the right person.
But if you make a patent to people, that we are all together,
and you help them to create good environments,
if you have had a good time with a person,
it is much easier for you to communicate with them, that you are willing to collaborate.
Many people take this part as something very aesthetic,
the typical ping-pong that entrepreneurs have, or football.
It is not about having a ping-pong or a football,
it is about having a point where people meet, have a good time,
and from there, that relationship is worked.
It is not the aesthetic part, the cool part, or the cool part,
that many people want to give.
In the end, people work with people and for people.
I have been in offices where they have all the details of start-ups,
the scooter, the ping-pong, the football, and you see them all sad.
It does not work.
They do not let them use it.
I do not know if they let them use it or not,
but in the end, the reality is that they do not talk to each other,
they are sad, and the aesthetic detail is not accompanied by anything else,
by the truth, by the values, as you told us.
And that we have to set an example.
We have a slogan, which is to say that no one is going to do more stupid than their boss.
So, the bosses or department directors have to set an example,
and we are the first ones to be dressed up on Carnival day,
which is something we have as a tradition in the office,
or the day we have an RSC activity, being the first to do it.
Obviously, if it does not go from top to bottom, it does not permeate.
A movie is coming to my mind, which is the logo of Wall Street.
We should not say that, right?
It is a different culture, not the one I would promote in my company,
but in the end it is a powerful culture, the one they have in the movie.
We have said three points and we have the last one left.
The one of caring for people.
As an organization, you have to let your people know that you are caring for them.
And this part does not have to be confused with giving everything they ask for.
As an organization, you have to know what you want to give.
In our case, we give a lot of weight to training.
And whoever comes, and has the time to be with us,
two months because he is going to do some practices,
two years because he decides to leave, or 20, I hope we get there.
That person has to have grown as much as the company has.
In the end, when you work or start a startup,
you give a lot of energy and you give a lot to the project.
And in the end you give yourself a lot from the heart.
It is a project in which you believe, you do not know if it will work or not,
and you put a lot of soul in the project.
And it is the cool part of entrepreneurs or the one that hooks.
So, as an organization, you have to be generous with what you have been given.
And just as you give back to society what you take,
you also have to give it to the employees.
And what do you give them? Training?
We give a lot of training.
Then we work a lot on the part of conciliation.
And when I talk about conciliation, I do not mean only the part of family conciliation.
You have to help people to conciliate with their studies, for example,
or conciliate with their private life.
And it is very important.
You cannot ask someone to develop professionally and get here
if the personal part is being stolen and you are taking away their energy.
That part is fundamental.
So, that conciliation in all its personal part,
being available is 100% for them.
My job, if I have time, I do other things,
is to be available to people and to help them.
If something happens to them at work or outside,
I help them to solve it.
It is not real that Lidia, who is at home,
removes that paper from the office door
and the Chief Happiness Officer comes in,
and then the Chief Happiness Officer stays in Habitísimo and I go to my house.
That separation is not real.
And if you want a person to be in a competitive environment, giving 100%,
he cannot be worrying or carrying a backpack full of stones.
I always give the same example.
The environment is super competitive, I will not repeat it in the global part,
but the world in which we move is similar to running 100 meters with Usain Bolt.
You already know that the probabilities are scarce and that the other will run a lot.
But if in addition to having to run 100 meters,
you are put a few pounds on your feet and you go 50 meters back,
that is already impossible.
So what we try to mitigate is that,
to remove that weight, put them on the line,
and that the person can develop the potential.
I would add here, at least, to give them a lot of freedom,
not to empower them.
Give them a lot of freedom, give them a lot of responsibility,
because that makes people grow.
And autonomy.
And autonomy, yes.
The main task for me as a department director, a boss, a team leader,
whatever you want to call it, is to recognize their own shortcomings,
I go back to being aware, self-knowledge, ego, and so on,
and surround yourself with people who supply those shortcomings.
If you surround yourself with people who supply those shortcomings and empower them a lot,
the team is empowered, has a brutal level of engagement,
which is the desirable, the opposite of stress,
and it is what makes the work absorb you and you dedicate hours without effort
and you lose track of time.
You have people who face challenges better,
because they have levels of self-knowledge and a brutal self-efficacy.
So, when a problem comes, they know they will be able to solve it.
If you haven't given them some colleagues with whom they can interact,
they will be able to help them solve that problem,
and they will also contribute ideas,
because they know that the knowledge they have is great.
Ok, so we have been very clear about the benefits that are obtained
at the organizational level, taking better care of people,
and you proposed four initiatives that I will simply name,
which were one, taking care of the leadership style,
which you do by training, being very close to the team leaders,
taking care of corporate culture, always based on values,
values that have to be embedded in absolutely every decision,
every action, every day.
We were talking about, I call them support networks,
but basically it is a name, a little, support networks,
which sounds very technical, but deep down it is that a company is,
that everyone is very close, that they are good colleagues,
that they know each other and that they are able to share information,
and you gave us an interesting advice,
and it is that sometimes that is more effective
than the fact of establishing formal processes of information flows.
Sometimes it is better that, that they go on Thursdays to have drinks,
and that the company pays them and they become friends,
and that will have a greater impact than the fact of defining flows.
And finally, you were talking about taking care of people,
which is how, that is, taking care of people, I understand, giving them a lot,
because if you ask them a lot, you have to give them a lot,
and in your case you talk about training, you talk about reconciliation,
and you talk about always being close to the employees.
Okay, Lidia, thank you very much, congratulations on your project,
and I wish you many successes.
Thank you.